caribou
are north america's long distance
walkers spending their entire lives on
the move
this far north the winter days are short
and the caribou
use the daylight hours to search for
food
this winter herd consists mainly of
females and calves
they're part of the bigger george river
herd canada's largest
which numbers an impressive half a
million
when not moving caribou spend much of
the day with their heads buried in the
snow
the males have lost their antlers but
the females keep theirs throughout the
winter
as mothers they need to be able to
protect their excavations
for beneath the snow they find a lichen
known as reindeer moss
which is rich in energy and the main
winter diet for them and their calves
unlike other deer a cannibal muzzle is
completely third
a necessary protection against frostbite
and their legs
have a built-in arterial bypass that
keeps heat in the upper body where it's
most needed
the herding instinct increases with the
lengthening days
and the caribou become more purposeful
in their travelling
this is the start of the great migration
as they prepare to leave their wintering
grounds
and journey towards the open tundra
reunited at last
the mother sees her chick for the first
time
she's keen to start parenting but the
father needs persuading to surrender the
chick
he's been caring for all winter
he must now put his chick at risk in
these temperatures it could freeze in
seconds
the male will have to let go
eventually the transfer to the mother is
safely made
[Music]
the chicks grow quickly on a diet of
fish
and squid
soon they're keen to explore but always
with mother in tow
this chick is less fortunate its mother
has not returned
to claim it
another orphan is searching for a new
family but this female already has a
chick of her own
some orphans receive too much mothering
from penguins whose own chicks have not
survived
the urge to parent is so strong that
they will compete with one another to
adopt any chick they find
many of these squabbles end in tragedy
as the poor chick
is trampled to death
those chicks that do have parents
quickly learn
survival skills
even in spring they must huddle together
for warmth
just as their fathers did in the depths
of winter
a group of chicks has got lost in the
blizzard
cold and disorientated they search for
the colony
it will not be long before the storm
claims
its first victims
by early summer the chicks are
surprisingly well developed
and now look ready to take on the world
those that survive their first year have
the best possible start in life
thanks to the extraordinary hardships
endured by their parents
parents who battled with the antarctic
winter
and won if animals
are to work in a team they need to be
able to
communicate with one another and
sometimes
it's possible for you to communicate
with them
[Music]
oh
wolves how to warn neighboring packs to
keep their distance
but they also do so to reunite their own
pack
if it's got scattered after a long hunt
and as they assemble again
they visibly delight in one another's
company
this back too like that of african
hunting dogs
is ruled by an alpha pair who are the
only ones to breed
but there's also a strict hierarchy
among the other members
one for males and one for females this
is reinforced daily by mouth-licking
crawling and mounting
these rituals become particularly
intense just before the pack
leaves on a hunt it's a bonding session
that reminds each hunter
of its place in the team invaluable
in the struggle to come
and off they go
those distant dots are their targets
elk the north american equivalent of the
european red deer
[Music]
snow drifts will make the chase
difficult the wolf's pads are
particularly broad
but in really deep snow the elk's long
legs give them the advantage
and in such country as this there's
little chance of taking them by surprise
so the chase is likely to be a long and
exhausting one
one of the stags is flagging and the
pack have managed to separate it from
the main herd
another sprints past close by and
confuses things
most of the wolves stick to their
original quarry
they have after all been harrying it for
some time and it may be tiring
but it's got a way
another wolf is chasing the stag that
ran by them earlier
but that escapes too only one in ten
wolf hunts is successful we've confirmed
at least
one tiger is in the reserve
but a single tiger doesn't make a viable
population
usa risk only has a future if tigers are
breeding here
we need to find more
russian technology helps us deploy more
camera traps
across the reserve
we set cameras where victor thinks
tigers could pass
but it's not just tigers that trigger
them
over several days we continue to put out
cameras
and scour the forest for signs finally
we get together to see what we've
captured
okay guys are you ready here we go
it's supposed to show that the camera is
actually working
okay moving on quickly this man is going
to have a heart attack
if i don't show him something
interesting
then our first glimpse of the animal
that we've been looking for
[Music]
oh my god
this footage is incredibly rare and it's
the first time many of the russian
researchers
have seen shots like these sorry repeat
show them again
[Music]
a male tiger previously coloured by
victor
away from his usual area victor thinks
he could be searching for a mate
so he's sniffing around all the time
getting used to the environment yeah
never a dull moment they're always very
active their metabolism is
very high no such thing really as a fat
wolverine
and they don't hibernate like a bear so
they just keep going all winter
that's right they don't have much time
it's all about survival you know and
mother nature doesn't give an animal
like this a lot of margin for air
as scavengers most of the wolverines
diet
is dead animals creatures that have
perished in these extreme conditions
and to find their food wolverines take
advantage of one of nature's most
destructive forces
avalanches
as snow thunders down the mountainside
mammals are often buried beneath
it's thought wolverines can sniff out
frozen carcasses
even deep beneath the snow
to test this out helen buries some
frozen meat
deep in the snow she'll return in a few
hours with jasper
to see if he can find it just using his
sense of smell
before that she's got a demonstration to
show how
our noses and the wolverines work
it involves an orange
when i sniff the orange
it's really strong this one is that the
the scent molecules from the orange are
going up my nose and they're going up
to the top here and there's a structure
up there that's called the epithelial
membrane and that is where the odor
detectors are
it's thought smell works like a lock and
key
the scent molecule is the key and will
only fit
certain locks the odor detectors
we have 400 different types of locks
but scent molecules can hit many
combinations of these receptors
so we can identify thousands of
different smells
most mammals detect scent in the same
way
but for wolverines it's all about
sensitivity
detecting the tiniest traces of scent
even
deep under the snow so let's see how
jasper gets on
finding the buried meat they start
several hundred meters away and let
jasper
choose the course he's smelling things
right now helen
and it's not only what's on the snow
it's the air drifting past that he's
smelling
[Music]
he picks up a cent quickly but is it the
right one
oh having a bit of sniff here
he definitely knows there's something
here
he's on to some scent there for sure
those big paws are pretty efficient
aren't they yes yes
he looks like nothing would get in his
way isn't it shifting a lot of snow
yeah oh there we go
he's got it he got it he found it
wolves these in northern canada are the
largest and most powerful
in the world and they're setting out to
hunt
the pack is 25 strong a sign that the
prey they're seeking
is formidable
these bison are even bigger than their
southern cousins
and the largest land animals in north
america
for generations wolves and bison here
have been shaped by their battles with
each other
making each the most impressive of its
kind
the bison will not stay long among the
trees
they're not safe here
the wolves are closing in but their
chance of ambushing the bison in the
woods has passed
their prey are now in the open and
grouped together for safety
[Music]
the wolves will need to work as a team
if they're to make a kill
they circle the herd trying to unsettle
it and split it up
but the bison are armed and dangerous
they will be safe
as long as they stick together
the wolves upped their game hurrying the
herd a ploy to trigger a stampede and
spit away one of the smaller ones
the bison form a defensive circle around
their young horns pointing outwards
the wolves need a bison to break rank
but the tables are turning and now the
wolves have to retreat
the pack focused their attention on the
rear of the herd
and the bison begin to panic
[Music]
a young bison falls behind
even this yearling dwarfs the wolves
running head down the herd's only
thought is escape
a stroke of luck for the wolves
the kill will feed the pack for several
days
but then they will have to resume the
chase
at the frozen ends of our planet the
struggle for survival
never eases
the battlefield's enormous its size
makes the polar bear a perpetual nomad
trekking 15 miles a day and up to 5 000
a year
on ice that's constantly moving
our story starts down there in the ice
and snow
it's spring and a new life is about to
see daylight
for the first time
but not until this female tests the air
she's been holed up for nearly six
months
and she doesn't know what's out there
now
there could be danger and she has
something precious to protect
when she went into the den last winter
she was 50 percent heavier
and alone but she's not alone now
she has a cup one cup
it's his first experience of the wider
world
the first moment away from the warm dark
safety of the den
he was born in january just over three
months ago
the world he came into was small and
cramped
he had fur but his eyes were closed he
wasn't any bigger than a guinea pig
also roaming far and wide in the
extensive forests here
are the elusive snow monkeys but winter
shrinks their feeding grounds
making them easier to spot
ah there they are
wow just below us look at that
oh my god
okay okay we are so so lucky
this is brilliant that's amazing
how about that out of nowhere
this is exactly what i was saying
they're feeding in
the top of the pine trees you can see
this one here actually has a pine cone
in its hands it's just nibbling always
get the
the seeds that are inside it
and they're all just perched
precariously over the top of the water
aren't they
it's fabulous in fact once you get your
eye in
there's dozens of them there are yeah
you can see how
actual waves almost crashing below them
clear water
yeah and have monkeys i know
it's such a bizarre sight you know i've
filmed primates
all over the world but there's nowhere
that it's like this
you know there's nowhere where they're
living in a place where
it's so cold so challenging
the monkeys here are the most northern
dwelling primates in the world
blizzard camps soon attracts a bear's
attention
it's something new to play with
[Applause]
but polar bears play rough
and retreat is the better part of
fortunately blizzard cam has a decoy
its spherical shape makes snowball cam
far
tougher to crack
although just as intriguing
[Music]
as the bears return to fighting snowball
cam
can roll it well
this is bare fight club a chance to test
their strength
and practice moves that one day they'll
use in earnest
snowball cam is right in the thick of it
[Music]
soon they'll be fighting over females
then things will really get serious
[Music]
now they even have time for a game of
football
[Music]
they should enjoy it while they can soon
they will be rivals it's the price of
growing up
pregnant polar bears are also on notice
at this
time of year they're desperate for seals
but seals aren't desperate to be eaten
they have the fat the bears need
but that fat also allows them to escape
under the ice
this leaves a bear waiting at a
breathing hole hoping a seal will
eventually use it
a tactic that works about one time in
every ten
this is one of the other nine
one time in ten is enough though for the
bear
and her followers
she can't let the success rate get any
lower
if it does a pregnant bear's project is
probably hopeless
it's not only herself she has to get
through the winter
but two growing babies
not until she sees the sun again in
spring will she know that she ate enough
fat
in the summer
it's a gamble the only way a female can
win it now is to settle into her den
and push her body to the limit
outside the male bears keep on hunting
as the ice sheet expands their travels
to find food will get longer and longer
but to get through their winter the
females will have to travel
through time
to save energy for her babies a female
has to cut her own energy use
almost to nothing special hormones slow
her to a standstill
and she goes into a deep sleep that will
last for months
she won't eat drink or defecate she'll
just lie there
and get ever thinner
[Music]
you